[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: The Economist magazine coined this phrase in 1977 in the context of the Netherlands,
[Amit Varma]: which had a stroke of good fortune when natural gas was discovered in Groningen in 1959.
[Amit Varma]: Or was it really good fortune?
[Amit Varma]: Because of this natural resource, foreign exchange flooded into the country and their own currency became stronger.
[Amit Varma]: This meant imports became cheaper and people could now afford the best goods from across the world.
[Amit Varma]: As a result of this, the local manufacturing sector went into decline.
[Amit Varma]: What initially seemed like good luck, later appeared to be not quite so lucky after all.
[Amit Varma]: A classic modern case of the Dutch disease is Venezuela.
[Amit Varma]: Large reserves of oil were discovered there more than a century ago in 1914,
[Amit Varma]: and a relatively poor country, suddenly sitting on humongous oil reserves, became quite rich as the years went by.
[Amit Varma]: But what this also did was that it lowered the incentives for the governments that ran the country
[Amit Varma]: to learn the good habits that take a nation towards prosperity.
[Amit Varma]: There was so much oil wealth that governments quickly developed patterns of patronage and cronyism.
[Amit Varma]: Bad governance and poor economic policies did not have the cost they should have
[Amit Varma]: because there was always so much oil wealth floating around.
[Amit Varma]: In a situation like this, sooner or later, something always has to give.
[Amit Varma]: Venezuela is now going through an enormous humanitarian crisis,
[Amit Varma]: caused by bad economics but enabled by the bonanza of oil.
[Amit Varma]: I'll explore some of that in this episode, but before I do, here's a thought.
[Amit Varma]: Does the same process by which too much of a good thing can be bad for countries,
[Amit Varma]: can it also be bad for individuals?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: The 19th century Venezuelan hero Simon Bolivar once said,
[Amit Varma]: to understand revolutions and their participants, we must observe them at close range
[Amit Varma]: and judge them at great distance.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Alexandra Ulmer, who spent a few years studying Venezuela at close range,
[Amit Varma]: as an oil correspondent for Reuters based in Caracas, the capital of Venezuela,
[Amit Varma]: but is now based in Bombay, at some distance from Venezuela.
[Amit Varma]: I asked her to join me on the show to chat not just about Venezuela,
[Amit Varma]: but also the craft of news reporting, as the title of this episode, Reporting Venezuela, indicates.
[Amit Varma]: But before we begin our conversation, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price,
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products,
[Amit Varma]: including fridge magnets with some stunning motifs,
[Amit Varma]: and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vasvo X Vasvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip Sharma,
[Amit Varma]: Shruti Nelson and Pradeep Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting,
[Amit Varma]: and even if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend,
[Amit Varma]: head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an O-U.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20.
[Amit Varma]: That's I-V-M for IVM Podcast.
[Amit Varma]: IVM20 for a 20% discount at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene in The Unseen, Alexandra.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit. Such a treat to be here.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about how you became a journalist.
[Amit Varma]: What drew you towards journalism?
[Guest]: I had always had two twin passions, one of them was current affairs,
[Guest]: and the other one was writing.
[Guest]: And for some strange reason, I never really thought to put them together
[Guest]: until I was at university and I started working on this school paper.
[Guest]: And I remember not being able to sleep the night before my first article,
[Guest]: which was something very mundane and uninteresting, came out.
[Guest]: And that's when I knew I was hooked.
[Amit Varma]: So where did you go from there?
[Guest]: I started as an intern with Reuters in Buenos Aires.
[Guest]: I was fascinated with Latin America and wanted to get going there.
[Guest]: Then went on to be a stringer for Reuters again in Chile,
[Guest]: just on the other side of the Andes,
[Guest]: where I did a lot of reporting on economics and mining
[Guest]: and learned a lot more about how the world goes around,
[Guest]: but was frankly a little bored as a journalist.
[Guest]: And then Venezuela came to the fore, and about four years ago I moved to Caracas.
[Amit Varma]: And what's a food chain of journalism like?
[Amit Varma]: Like you begin as an intern, then you're a stringer,
[Amit Varma]: then you're a full-fledged reporter.
[Amit Varma]: How does the job description change?
[Amit Varma]: What are the kind of things that you did on the job?
[Guest]: So as an intern in Buenos Aires, I had the best of all worlds.
[Guest]: I was able to cover fun but also fundamental events
[Guest]: like the legalization of gay marriage in Argentina,
[Guest]: and I wrote soft features on being a vegetarian in Buenos Aires,
[Guest]: the meat capital of the world.
[Amit Varma]: You're a vegetarian?
[Amit Varma]: Yes, I am.
[Guest]: Horror.
[Guest]: I've never been as happy as I am in India.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to Mumbai!
[Amit Varma]: Yes, thank you.
[Guest]: It's very refreshing after the barbecues of Latin America.
[Amit Varma]: I'd trade places with you any day.
[Guest]: Yeah, well, then if you're a meat lover, Argentina is the place.
[Guest]: And, you know, as you go up the food chain as a stringer,
[Guest]: I had a lot of responsibilities for somewhat mindless tasks
[Unknown]: like at the time covering the local stock market,
[Guest]: running out to press conferences, learning the ropes,
[Guest]: which is essential and is what you build on to become a better journalist.
[Amit Varma]: And what are the sort of values that you picked up in,
[Amit Varma]: which you pick up in any good news organization,
[Amit Varma]: you know, like Reuters obviously is,
[Amit Varma]: in terms of the kind of journalism you do?
[Amit Varma]: What's the rigor that you have to follow?
[Guest]: It's incredibly rigorous.
[Guest]: It's a fantastic school of journalism.
[Guest]: It's daunting because you're learning on the spot,
[Guest]: and journalism in that sense is much more of a craft
[Guest]: than something you learn within an established school or institution.
[Guest]: So you learn to be rigorous with your facts.
[Guest]: You learn to check with sources.
[Guest]: You learn to question everything.
[Guest]: You learn to be fair.
[Guest]: Of course, all these issues are deeply philosophical,
[Guest]: and we can debate them at great length because there's no perfect recipe for it.
[Guest]: But especially, I think, as a foreign news outlet in countries
[Guest]: where sometimes the local media is coward
[Guest]: or doesn't have the resources to cover something as well as it would have otherwise,
[Guest]: you become a frame of reference.
[Guest]: So there's great responsibility on having smart, articulate, fair coverage.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, one of the very clear demarcations in foreign media
[Amit Varma]: is the line between news and opinion,
[Amit Varma]: which sometimes gets muddy in India.
[Amit Varma]: And you were, of course, a reporter all along.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, how do you sort of get to that level of objectivity
[Amit Varma]: where you sort of keep your feelings about what you're reporting
[Amit Varma]: out of your reportage itself?
[Amit Varma]: Like, do you have to make a special effort to do that?
[Amit Varma]: Can you go too far?
[Guest]: I think you always have to be careful.
[Guest]: I think in some ways it's easier when you're not reporting on your own country
[Guest]: because you're more detached from the situation.
[Guest]: But, you know, being fair also entails portraying the situation accurately.
[Guest]: Like one of the old adages in journalism is
[Guest]: if one person says it's raining outside,
[Guest]: the other person says it's, you know, a beautiful, glorious day
[Guest]: and you should go to the beach, your job isn't to portray both sides.
[Guest]: Your job is to open the curtains and tell readers what's going on.
[Guest]: Now, that's a clean-cut example.
[Guest]: In the real world, it can get muddier than that.
[Guest]: But I think trying to find the sweet spot between being fair
[Guest]: to the different sides and ideas involved,
[Guest]: but also, you know, not just being a robot who's throwing out the facts
[Guest]: coming from different sides and actually assessing how the situation is evolved,
[Guest]: how politicians or whoever's claims stake up to what they've actually done
[Guest]: is in essence an essential part of our job.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, like you said, the example you gave is clear-cut.
[Amit Varma]: When it comes to something like covering a country like Venezuela, for example,
[Amit Varma]: where the economics is very complicated,
[Amit Varma]: the politics is very complicated, society is complicated,
[Amit Varma]: then does it involve a case of just having to learn a lot of things
[Amit Varma]: before you can even begin to report?
[Guest]: I think so.
[Guest]: But I think in a place like Venezuela, which essentially has become devoid of fact,
[Guest]: it's very difficult to do that.
[Guest]: I'll give you an example.
[Guest]: Venezuela has rampant corruption.
[Guest]: We know that is one of the fundamental reasons this government has been so inept
[Guest]: and has basically left Venezuela penniless.
[Guest]: For a long time, it was very difficult for us to say that.
[Guest]: We knew money was disappearing, but if you don't have the proof,
[Guest]: you don't write it if you're a rigorous journalist.
[Guest]: Of course, now there are multiple cases across the United States and in Europe
[Guest]: where, you know, a single businessman has been accused
[Guest]: and has pleaded guilty to embezzling, say, a billion dollars.
[Guest]: That gives you an idea of the scale of graft we're talking about.
[Guest]: But for a long time, it can be frustrating because to be a rigorous reporter,
[Guest]: you can't just throw around baseless claims,
[Guest]: but that also means you're missing a fundamental part of the story
[Guest]: that you're struggling to tell the readers,
[Guest]: and I think that's the deepest frustration there can be.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, because there must be times when you absolutely know something,
[Amit Varma]: but you cannot say it, and you have to kind of get there from other places.
[Amit Varma]: So before you went to Venezuela, did you want to go to Venezuela,
[Amit Varma]: or was it something that Reuters offered you the opportunity,
[Amit Varma]: and then you looked into it and said, huh, that's interesting?
[Guest]: No, I had been fascinated by Venezuela, mesmerized for a long time.
[Guest]: I had gotten a student grant when I was at university
[Guest]: to do a project on political street art there,
[Guest]: as one does when one is a bright-eyed, bushy-tailed university student.
[Guest]: And I had spent two weeks in the country
[Guest]: and had been reading obsessively ever since,
[Guest]: but I was very deterred by the security situation there
[Guest]: and never thought I could actually live there
[Amit Varma]: because it was too dangerous and scared me.
[Amit Varma]: Which year was this?
[Amit Varma]: I went there as a student in 2011.
[Guest]: And moved there in 2014 after going for a brief stint
[Guest]: and seeing that I could live there, you know, despite the crime concerns.
[Amit Varma]: So when you started reporting in Venezuela, how easy was access?
[Guest]: Well, access on the street to people was wonderfully easy.
[Guest]: I mean, Venezuelans are expansive, fun, Caribbean people who love to chat.
[Guest]: So after Chile, which is a much kind of more dour, closed society,
[Guest]: it was a treat for me to just go out
[Guest]: and be able to interview people in the supermarket lines
[Guest]: and have them genuinely tell me about their lives and their sufferings.
[Guest]: Because they wanted to, they wanted to be heard,
[Guest]: and that's the way they are.
[Guest]: Conversely, the government is fairly shut off.
[Guest]: At the time, we still had the occasional press conference.
[Guest]: Sometimes they would answer questions,
[Guest]: but it was the kind of situation where GDP, inflation, crime data,
[Guest]: emigration data, none of that was being published anymore.
[Guest]: As you mentioned at the start of the podcast, I covered oil,
[Guest]: and that meant covering the big, omnipresent state oil company.
[Guest]: I spent four years in Venezuela,
[Guest]: and I genuinely don't think they ever answered one of my questions.
[Guest]: You know, when you're writing a story,
[Guest]: you send in a request for comment by phone or by email
[Guest]: to give the person concerned a chance to respond,
[Guest]: and I never got a single answer to my emails.
[Guest]: I mean, it's that kind of black hole situation you're talking about.
[Guest]: So it forces you to be a kind of creative, enterprising reporter
[Guest]: to get to the stories,
[Guest]: which always means you're missing a significant chunk of data
[Guest]: and the government side.
[Guest]: At the end of the day, it's self-defeating for the government
[Guest]: because they don't speak out, right?
[Amit Varma]: Right, and of course, distrust towards the media is an attitude
[Amit Varma]: that really came out much earlier from the time Chávez took over
[Amit Varma]: because like a lot of populists,
[Amit Varma]: he kind of looked at the media as part of the elites
[Amit Varma]: who were antagonistic to him,
[Amit Varma]: and he tried to sort of control communications and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: parallels of which we see in many other countries.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about how Venezuela got here,
[Amit Varma]: you know, starting from before Maduro,
[Amit Varma]: like when Maduro was president,
[Amit Varma]: starting from maybe even before Chávez,
[Amit Varma]: like a lot of people lay the blame quite correctly
[Amit Varma]: for what's going on to the bad economic policies in Chávez's time,
[Amit Varma]: which have continued with Maduro.
[Amit Varma]: But Venezuela was both oil rich and in deep trouble a lot before that.
[Guest]: It's been a turbulent history. Tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: Absolutely. I mean, it's been a cycle of booms and busts
[Guest]: basically due to the oil barrel.
[Guest]: So Venezuela was, by some metrics,
[Guest]: one of the richest countries in Latin America
[Guest]: where this elite, this filthy rich would travel to Miami
[Guest]: and famously say, give me two of everything, it's so cheap.
[Guest]: Of course, that fueled a lot of inequality and discontent
[Guest]: and a sense that the political establishment,
[Guest]: which was basically two political parties that would rotate power
[Guest]: through democratic elections,
[Guest]: but rotate power amongst themselves, wasn't representative.
[Guest]: And there had been sporadic violence and turbulence
[Guest]: in the country for a long time.
[Guest]: And Chávez, who came from a poor family from the Savannah lowlands,
[Guest]: really spoke to the people who felt marginalized by the system.
[Guest]: And because Venezuela is an oil rich country,
[Guest]: there's this idea that we are a rich country.
[Guest]: We should not be poor. This something has gone wrong
[Guest]: and someone is to blame for it.
[Guest]: And Chávez diagnosed that problem brilliantly, as many populists do,
[Guest]: and was elected in 1998.
[Guest]: There was immediate virulent opposition to him
[Guest]: from the elite in media and politics, etc.
[Guest]: And that culminated in a series of marches in 2002
[Guest]: that led to a brief coup against him,
[Guest]: where he was deposed for three days.
[Guest]: It remains a very complex, fiercely argued about episode
[Guest]: about exactly what happened to him.
[Guest]: Ultimately, he was reinstated by military loyalists.
[Guest]: And after that, some would say,
[Guest]: he became much more paranoid about any attempts against him
[Guest]: and clamped down much more on institutions,
[Guest]: the press, and any opposition he could see.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, there are memorable reports that during the coup,
[Amit Varma]: he chatted with a hero of his, Fidel Castro, on the phone.
[Amit Varma]: And Castro told him that, you know, whatever you do,
[Amit Varma]: don't surrender.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting to me how, you know, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: from 1958 to 1998, you had this sort of kleptocracy,
[Amit Varma]: this oligarchy of these two parties,
[Amit Varma]: which kind of controlled the economy in the system of patronage,
[Amit Varma]: where the oil wealth was sort of,
[Amit Varma]: and which was also incredibly corrupt.
[Amit Varma]: And Chávez detected that correctly and got to power.
[Amit Varma]: But what I always find kind of interesting is that
[Amit Varma]: for the first five or six years of his time,
[Amit Varma]: he professed himself to be non-ideological,
[Amit Varma]: where he said, I'm not a communist, I'm not a capitalist,
[Amit Varma]: even though, I mean, he had communist influences.
[Amit Varma]: He was a big fan of Marx and various other communist thinkers
[Amit Varma]: right from his student days.
[Guest]: But, you know, he said, I believe in the third way,
[Amit Varma]: which was, you know, perhaps a reference to Tony Blair's third way.
[Amit Varma]: But after 2002 and then 2004,
[Amit Varma]: what seemed to happen is that he hardened enormously
[Amit Varma]: and spoke about 21st century socialism
[Amit Varma]: and went in all the directions that he went in.
[Amit Varma]: So do you think that sort of change in direction
[Amit Varma]: came from political imperatives?
[Guest]: It's a very interesting question.
[Guest]: I undoubtedly think that he felt very vulnerable
[Guest]: after the coup and after being reinstated.
[Guest]: And his instinct was to try to therefore control whatever he could.
[Guest]: And the influence of Fidel Castro and other politicians
[Guest]: led to him pushing for much more control over the economy, especially.
[Guest]: And he enacted a series of policies
[Guest]: that would really be the downfall of Venezuela ultimately,
[Guest]: namely imposing currency controls in 2003,
[Guest]: which is what led to the mind-boggling distortions
[Guest]: we see today in Venezuela
[Guest]: that are to blame for much of the current crisis.
[Guest]: And yes, I think he's a dominating personality
[Guest]: and he was a dominating politician.
[Guest]: He was a dominating president.
[Guest]: His instinct was to control. Yes.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of became worse, A, because he's got Castro advising him
[Amit Varma]: on one side and on the other side.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the reason I sort of thought of that
[Amit Varma]: was when I was kind of reading through all of this,
[Amit Varma]: one parallel that came to mind was our own earlier Prime Minister Indira Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: who, you know, took over the Congress party in the mid-60s,
[Amit Varma]: but she was fighting against the established order in her own party.
[Amit Varma]: And to distinguish herself from them,
[Amit Varma]: she took this populist socialist line and did a lot of things
[Amit Varma]: which were economically disastrous,
[Amit Varma]: but which if you understand the political imperatives
[Amit Varma]: and a need to create a brand for herself
[Amit Varma]: and distinguish herself from them kind of made sense.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, the other part of, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: a lot about Chavez reminds me of Narendra Modi as well.
[Amit Varma]: And the other part of his rise to power
[Amit Varma]: and what happened when he got there was just kind of like
[Amit Varma]: a dog chasing a car and catching the car and not knowing what to do
[Amit Varma]: because he was incredibly good at campaigning.
[Guest]: He had no idea whatsoever of how to govern.
[Guest]: Interesting analogy.
[Guest]: Yes, I mean, Chavez at heart was a showman, right?
[Guest]: And he had the whole country or much of the country behind him.
[Guest]: The masses loved him.
[Guest]: It was like religious fervor going to his rallies.
[Guest]: It was unlike anything anyone had seen before.
[Guest]: And when you had that kind of unquestioning love,
[Guest]: his worst instincts were unleashed, right?
[Guest]: And Venezuela was a democracy,
[Guest]: but it didn't have entirely solid institutions.
[Guest]: And when Chavez was in power from 1999 to 2013,
[Guest]: he had plenty of time to dig away at them.
[Guest]: But I think, yes, his instinct was always to campaign.
[Guest]: And he would always boast,
[Guest]: we've had more elections than anywhere else in the world.
[Guest]: How can you criticize us for not being a democracy?
[Guest]: But that's what he reveled in, right?
[Guest]: And that's what he loved, not the day-to-day nitty gritty.
[Guest]: And that tendency was exacerbated by the fact that
[Guest]: during 10 years of his governance, you had an oil bonanza.
[Guest]: You didn't have to worry about the nitty gritty.
[Amit Varma]: The oil money was just gushing in.
[Amit Varma]: And this happened because 9-11 happened,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore the oil spigot slowed down in the Middle East,
[Amit Varma]: and Venezuela was certainly much in demand.
[Amit Varma]: And also he kind of revived the OPEC at this time, right?
[Guest]: Yes, yes, he was instrumental in that.
[Guest]: And I think the fact that the oil prices shot up was a saving grace.
[Guest]: I mean, politics is also about luck,
[Guest]: and Chávez was an incredibly lucky politician.
[Guest]: You know, I obviously don't want to be morbid,
[Guest]: but for instance, he also happened to die
[Guest]: right before the economy took a turn for the worst.
[Guest]: So even his exit was perfectly timed in terms of his legacy
[Guest]: in the eyes of his supporters, right?
[Amit Varma]: In fact, just looking through his career,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there are various parts where he got so lucky.
[Amit Varma]: For example, he almost didn't get through into the army
[Amit Varma]: because he failed his chemistry exam, right?
[Amit Varma]: And had that not happened,
[Amit Varma]: the subsequent events wouldn't have worked out the way they did.
[Amit Varma]: That while in the army for years,
[Amit Varma]: he wanted to overthrow the government,
[Amit Varma]: not because he had anything against the government
[Amit Varma]: or any particular precedent, but he just wanted to get to power.
[Amit Varma]: And he was planning a coup as administrations changed one by one.
[Amit Varma]: He's single-mindedly planning a coup for the sake of power itself.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, even when he, you know,
[Amit Varma]: he attempted a coup in 1992 and he failed,
[Amit Varma]: and he would have disappeared into oblivion and into prison.
[Amit Varma]: He had the powers that be not decided to put him on television.
[Amit Varma]: So he could tell his co-conspirators to surrender.
[Amit Varma]: And he suddenly became a media star after that.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean, he capitalized on those few minutes on television and said,
[Guest]: we failed for ahora, for now,
[Guest]: which became the slogan that everyone repeated.
[Guest]: And then he was pardoned, of course,
[Guest]: and got out and became a political figure in his own right.
[Guest]: So yes, from the chemistry exam to being pardoned,
[Amit Varma]: the stars aligned for him.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting how, you know,
[Amit Varma]: people close to him talk about how his personality changed so suddenly
[Amit Varma]: at two different parts of his life.
[Amit Varma]: One is once he comes on television and he becomes a superstar,
[Amit Varma]: and he literally becomes a sex symbol.
[Amit Varma]: Women everywhere are dying to have his baby, so to say,
[Amit Varma]: as one biographer put it.
[Amit Varma]: And the other when he actually comes to power,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, when he comes to power and he, you know,
[Amit Varma]: enters Miraflores, I think the presidential palace,
[Amit Varma]: he just becomes a completely different person and his allies from the period
[Amit Varma]: before that eventually all get disillusioned one by one and move on.
[Guest]: And he ends up surrounding himself with yes-men.
[Amit Varma]: And he ends up surrounding himself with yes-men.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, if you look at Maduro today,
[Amit Varma]: just reading the biographies of Chavez,
[Amit Varma]: the one thing that kind of struck me is that the only extraordinary thing
[Amit Varma]: about Maduro is that he never said no to Chavez,
[Amit Varma]: that he was almost like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: like again Indira Gandhi said about a former president of ours,
[Amit Varma]: Gyani Zayal Singh, before he became president,
[Amit Varma]: that if I ask him to clean my toilets, he will.
[Amit Varma]: And you get the same kind of sense about sort of Chavez and Maduro.
[Amit Varma]: And that's really the reason Maduro kind of got to power to begin with.
[Guest]: Yes. I mean, he describes himself as the son of Chavez.
[Guest]: He stakes his entire legacy on Chavez.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So again, extraordinary luck for Maduro as well.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about the confluence of oil and politics
[Amit Varma]: through the decades in Venezuela.
[Amit Varma]: Like, obviously, they discover oil, they're very lucky.
[Amit Varma]: Then they come to these deals where, for example,
[Amit Varma]: these foreign companies first come and they start taking the oil.
[Amit Varma]: And then they have these 50-50 arrangements where they get,
[Amit Varma]: share 50% of the profits with the state.
[Amit Varma]: And then that tilts further to the state.
[Amit Varma]: And then it's Venezuela, which actually forms OPEC.
[Amit Varma]: So all the power goes to the sort of –
[Amit Varma]: that actually pushes for the formation of OPEC.
[Amit Varma]: So all the power goes to the states rather than the companies.
[Amit Varma]: And then gradually that in the mid-'70s leads to the formation
[Amit Varma]: of the state oil company PVDSA.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about the role oil played in politics
[Amit Varma]: through the decades.
[Guest]: Yes. Well, oil is indistinguishable from Venezuela.
[Guest]: And the Venezuelan economy has always been hugely dependent on oil.
[Guest]: You mentioned the Dutch disease, and that impeded Venezuela
[Guest]: from having enough efficient industry and agriculture,
[Guest]: although it did have those sectors in the 70s and 80s.
[Guest]: But Chávez's big criticism was that the foreign companies
[Guest]: were getting too sweet a deal in Venezuela under the former governments.
[Guest]: And so very quickly, when he comes to power,
[Guest]: he understands that PVDSA, the state oil company,
[Guest]: will be crucial to his fortunes.
[Guest]: And, in fact, the lead-up to the coup, there's a strike
[Guest]: by PVDSA workers and engineers against Chávez.
[Guest]: So they bring the oil industry to a standstill,
[Guest]: which again shocks the oil market and completely attacks
[Guest]: the Venezuelan economy.
[Guest]: And ultimately, as we know, Chávez prevails,
[Guest]: and he absolutely purges the state oil company.
[Guest]: And so all these engineers who supported the opposition
[Guest]: and walked off their jobs are fired.
[Guest]: There's huge turnover.
[Guest]: A lot of these people incidentally ended up immigrating
[Guest]: to Colombia or Canada and helping basically create
[Guest]: the Colombian oil industry, so benefiting other countries.
[Guest]: And gradually, over time, PVDSA becomes a fiefdom for Chavismo.
[Guest]: For a long time, it maintains operational capacity,
[Guest]: even though it's highly indebted, inefficient, and corrupt,
[Guest]: but it still kind of has the veneer of a functional company.
[Guest]: But throughout my time there, you just saw it close off.
[Guest]: And in the last year, Maduro put a general in charge
[Guest]: of the state oil company because the military is absolutely
[Guest]: the other kind of crucial part to understanding Venezuela.
[Guest]: And generals have been sweetened by all these deals
[Guest]: that Maduro's offered them, you know, mining stakes,
[Guest]: control over imports, and the oil industry,
[Guest]: which is the crown jewel, as a way of rewarding them
[Guest]: for their loyalty and ensuring that they continue
[Guest]: to be loyal to him.
[Guest]: And it's led to an exodus of your low-level workers
[Guest]: who are already unable to eat three square meals a day
[Guest]: because they're just earning a handful of dollars a month.
[Guest]: Of course, you know, any engineer or chemist has fled
[Guest]: because they're not earning anything more.
[Guest]: They're often working in dangerous refineries
[Guest]: that haven't had proper maintenance work in years
[Guest]: and are a big threat.
[Guest]: And it's also actually very dangerous out in the oil fields
[Guest]: because large parts of Venezuela are essentially lawless.
[Guest]: And you're very exposed to theft and gangs looking
[Guest]: to rob copper or rob you in the oil installations.
[Guest]: So the whole industry is completely unraveled,
[Guest]: which is a huge threat for Maduro given that more than 90%
[Guest]: of the income, the country, comes from oil now
[Guest]: because all the other industries have fallen by the wayside.
[Guest]: And now, with the new sanctions from the Trump administration,
[Guest]: it's getting even harder for him to export oil.
[Guest]: So yet again, oil will be one of the big deciding factors
[Amit Varma]: in what happens in Venezuela.
[Amit Varma]: And this process was, like, it's common to all populists, really,
[Amit Varma]: that they attack the institutions in their countries
[Amit Varma]: which are supposed to act as checks and balances.
[Amit Varma]: And again, one of the things that Chávez did when he came to power
[Amit Varma]: is that he put military officers everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, this whole trend of...
[Amit Varma]: So even in the PDVSA, after the strike happened
[Amit Varma]: and he laid off all the employees or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: he then put military officers in charge
[Amit Varma]: and completely changed the way the institution worked
[Amit Varma]: in terms of sort of doing what people call petro-diplomacy,
[Amit Varma]: where he would, you know, offer sweet deals to neighboring countries
[Amit Varma]: which had communist leaders he was friendly with to get them on his side.
[Amit Varma]: And a large chunk of petrodollars, therefore,
[Amit Varma]: started going into this kind of diplomacy
[Amit Varma]: and doing special favors to people and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: Exactly. Cuba has been one of the big recipients of this petro-diplomacy.
[Guest]: You know, Venezuela still sends oil to Cuba
[Guest]: and Cuba, quote-unquote, repays Venezuela
[Guest]: by sending doctors and other security personnel to the country
[Guest]: in what Maduro's critics say is a grossly unfair trade-off.
[Guest]: And especially because it's fairly well-known in Cuba,
[Guest]: then Cuba then resells a lot of the oil it receives from Venezuela for profit.
[Amit Varma]: Which is a marvelously capitalistic thing for Cuba to do.
[Amit Varma]: And let's talk about what happened to the currency, for example.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, one of the books you recommended I read
[Amit Varma]: before we do this podcast was Crude Nation by Raúl Gallegos
[Amit Varma]: and that starts off with this fascinating chapter
[Amit Varma]: on how there are four currency rates,
[Amit Varma]: like three different official currency rates for the dollars
[Amit Varma]: and then there's another one which is black market
[Amit Varma]: and the top rate is like you pay a handful of bolivars for a dollar
[Amit Varma]: and then you increasingly pay more and more bolivars
[Amit Varma]: and obviously your cronies and people you favor get them at the cheapest rate
[Amit Varma]: and there's a whole industry where you're sort of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: buying dollars in the cheap and selling dollars in the black market
[Amit Varma]: for far more money.
[Amit Varma]: When you landed up there, how was it? How did you manage?
[Guest]: Well, it's an extraordinary system that you end up being very agile in
[Guest]: because you're always jumping between different currency systems.
[Guest]: But when I arrived, first of all, your bank card doesn't work.
[Guest]: No foreign cards work.
[Guest]: You could take money out but at an extraordinarily unfavorable rate
[Guest]: so you'd be getting a dollar out,
[Guest]: effectively getting what's worth a dollar on the black market
[Guest]: but spending maybe $50 for it in your bank account.
[Guest]: So what someone like me or others get is a middleman, right,
[Guest]: who you wire money to from your bank account abroad to his bank account abroad
[Guest]: and then he wires bolivares from his account to your account in Venezuela
[Guest]: and that allows you to navigate the system.
[Guest]: But it creates an enormous amount of distortions.
[Guest]: So, for instance, for a long time, foreign airlines priced their airfare
[Guest]: in local currency but at the pegged official rate.
[Guest]: So that meant people could fly literally from Caracas to London
[Guest]: for the equivalent of $40 if they were buying their currency
[Guest]: on the black market, right?
[Guest]: So it was a free-for-all.
[Guest]: It was this bizarre distorted party that people were taking care of.
[Guest]: Of course, someone has to pick up the bill
[Guest]: and foreign airlines are now owed a total of about $4 billion
[Guest]: because the Venezuelan government never then reimbursed them as promised.
[Guest]: So that's the kind of distorted magical realism side of it.
[Guest]: The real-world impact of it is that nothing worked, right,
[Guest]: because what you're supposed to trust, which is money,
[Guest]: which has a certain value and creates trust and creates your chain,
[Guest]: was completely distorted.
[Guest]: So things just didn't function.
[Guest]: Importers wouldn't import because they wouldn't have access
[Guest]: to the official currency because that was reserved for cronies
[Guest]: and so had to go to the black market rate if they could afford it
[Guest]: and then pass that cost on to customers.
[Guest]: If not, they folded shop.
[Guest]: So that was really the deathblow to the Venezuelan economy,
[Guest]: the incredible distortions in the currency.
[Amit Varma]: And then this differing access to the dollar
[Amit Varma]: then creates different classes of people, right?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean, the Venezuelans have a lot of vernacular
[Guest]: for what has happened in the last 10 years
[Guest]: and there's an expression which is boliburgues.
[Guest]: So it's a play on burguesia, so the bourgeoisie,
[Guest]: and boli being bolivariano,
[Guest]: which is this kind of following that Chávez created
[Guest]: based on Simón Bolívar.
[Guest]: So basically, these are the new rich,
[Guest]: those who benefited from the government's largesse.
[Guest]: The other term for them is enchufados,
[Guest]: so those who are plugged in.
[Guest]: That's essentially what they are.
[Guest]: They're plugged into the system,
[Guest]: so they get dollars at a preferential rate.
[Guest]: Their companies can be signed into the system to import food
[Guest]: and get the juicy government contracts, etc., etc.
[Amit Varma]: And on that note of juicy government contracts,
[Amit Varma]: we'll take a quick commercial break,
[Amit Varma]: which I promise you will be filled by a private party.
[Unknown]: Hello, hello, hello everybody.
[Unknown]: Welcome to another great week on the IBM Podcast Network.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media,
[Unknown]: please make sure you do.
[Unknown]: We are IBM Podcasts on Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram.
[Unknown]: As I mentioned over the last couple of weeks,
[Unknown]: we've been running a survey on our website.
[Unknown]: It's at ibmpodcast.com slash survey.
[Unknown]: Please fill it out if you haven't already.
[Unknown]: And just so you guys know, there is a prize involved
[Unknown]: for the 25 people we will select at random,
[Unknown]: and we will send them an IBM Podcast mug.
[Unknown]: So, this week on Cyrus Says,
[Unknown]: Cyrus' guest is Yash Banerjee,
[Unknown]: co-founder of Bombay Canteen and O'Pedro.
[Unknown]: He talks about the intricacies of the F&B industry in India
[Unknown]: and the origins of his ventures.
[Unknown]: On Geekfruit, Tejas Dinkar and Janam
[Unknown]: talk about Netflix's latest series, Russian Doll,
[Unknown]: and why you should finish watching it right away.
[Unknown]: On Ganatantra, the hosts unpack how political violence works in India
[Unknown]: and why the absence of large-scale communal riots
[Unknown]: does not necessarily indicate social harmony.
[Unknown]: On Dalle Harate, the hosts are joined by Ramaprasad,
[Unknown]: who translated the Amaru Shataka,
[Unknown]: a collection of love poems from Sanskrit to Kannada.
[Unknown]: He talks about the immortal nature of this work.
[Unknown]: On Football Twaddle, the hosts discuss the Kepa and Sari incidents
[Unknown]: along with everything that happened in the Premier League.
[Unknown]: On The Habit Coach podcast, Ashton guides you through
[Unknown]: starting a sugar-less life
[Unknown]: and the importance of substituting sugar with stevia.
[Unknown]: In the season finale of our Hindi show, Cinemaya,
[Unknown]: Swati Bakshi is in conversation with Alankrita Srivastav,
[Unknown]: who discusses her journey from journalism to filmmaking and everything in between.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's continue with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Alexandra Ulmer about Venezuela.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the other thing everybody sort of notices about Venezuela
[Amit Varma]: is the mad inflation.
[Amit Varma]: You know, now it's at crazy levels,
[Amit Varma]: but even under Chavez, it was at like 60% a year,
[Amit Varma]: and it would balloon.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that I realized was,
[Amit Varma]: one, that inflation has been a common part of Venezuela
[Amit Varma]: for decades, not just a Chavez issue.
[Amit Varma]: And two, there's a quality which people often consider
[Amit Varma]: a cultural quality, but which really seemed to me
[Amit Varma]: to come out of economic imperatives,
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that people often say that
[Amit Varma]: so-and-so kind of people or so-and-so culture,
[Unknown]: they are good savers, they like to save,
[Amit Varma]: as if that's a cultural value.
[Amit Varma]: But what inflation did to Venezuela was,
[Amit Varma]: because inflation was so high,
[Amit Varma]: it just made no rational sense to save.
[Amit Varma]: And Venezuelans would, I mean, taking debt makes,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, just to give an illustration of this,
[Amit Varma]: you could buy a house today at regular EMIs,
[Amit Varma]: and a year later, your EMIs would really be
[Amit Varma]: as much as you are paying to buy a loaf of bread.
[Amit Varma]: So it makes, so the moment, whatever debt you can get,
[Amit Varma]: people would take it, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so even the poorest people would take debt
[Amit Varma]: and buy flat-screen TVs and whatever
[Amit Varma]: and spend it on consumer goods.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not because of materialism gone mad
[Amit Varma]: or consumerism or anything like that,
[Amit Varma]: it's just that those are the economic incentives.
[Amit Varma]: So it's like culture being driven by economics.
[Guest]: And Latin Americans, historically,
[Guest]: have not been considered good savers,
[Guest]: but that's because they've, almost every country
[Guest]: has had some kind of spate of inflation.
[Guest]: Venezuela has pushed it to a whole other level, right?
[Guest]: We're looking at 2 million percent,
[Guest]: even though, as I mentioned,
[Guest]: we don't have official government data.
[Guest]: It's wild, and it's really the only thing
[Guest]: people talk about because it is such a disorienting
[Guest]: and life-destroying phenomenon.
[Guest]: It destroys your salary.
[Guest]: It's as if you walked into a supermarket tomorrow
[Guest]: and a sack of rice was priced at 18,000 rupees.
[Guest]: How can you talk about anything else?
[Guest]: It's your livelihood.
[Guest]: It's everything you thought was stable
[Guest]: that is being cut out from under you.
[Guest]: And what's particularly fascinating
[Guest]: about this spate of hyperinflation
[Guest]: is that it seems to be the first one of the digital age.
[Guest]: So Venezuelan government can't even print
[Guest]: enough physical money to keep up with the money
[Guest]: it's creating in general.
[Guest]: So there's a perennial shortage of bills.
[Guest]: So prices are going up all the time,
[Guest]: but no one has any physical money,
[Guest]: which is insane because it's not the kind of
[Guest]: wheelbarrow image you have of hyperinflation, right?
[Guest]: So what does that mean?
[Guest]: That means every ATM you walk in front of
[Guest]: has tens of people queuing up at any given time
[Guest]: hoping to get a few bills out,
[Guest]: even though the maximum is about $2
[Guest]: that you can take out of the ATM.
[Amit Varma]: Which you can't buy anything with.
[Guest]: You can't buy anything with that,
[Guest]: especially when prices are changing every day.
[Guest]: So you use your bank card.
[Guest]: Wait, there's a catch there too.
[Guest]: Venezuela hasn't invested in its telecom system
[Guest]: and has fixed prices for years,
[Guest]: so they're completely oversaturated
[Guest]: and so point of sales collapse all the time.
[Guest]: They're also rolling blackouts
[Guest]: because ditto, no investment, no maintenance.
[Guest]: So the power grid is incredibly shaky.
[Guest]: Your phones, same issue.
[Guest]: So there literally were times
[Guest]: where I could not pay for something.
[Guest]: I obviously had the money in my account.
[Guest]: I wanted to pay for it, but nothing worked.
[Guest]: I had no bills.
[Guest]: The power system was down.
[Guest]: The point of sale didn't work.
[Guest]: And there's just no way to conduct
[Guest]: a very basic economic transaction.
[Amit Varma]: And just for my listeners' benefit,
[Amit Varma]: to talk about the monetary basis of inflation,
[Amit Varma]: what inflation is typically caused by
[Amit Varma]: is when the money supply goes up
[Amit Varma]: relative to the goods and services available.
[Amit Varma]: So what happens is when a government decides
[Amit Varma]: that it needs to up its spending
[Amit Varma]: or pay back its debts or whatever
[Amit Varma]: and it starts printing money,
[Amit Varma]: the amount of money relative to goods and services
[Amit Varma]: just goes up and therefore you have
[Amit Varma]: more money chasing the same number of goods.
[Amit Varma]: So obviously supply and demand,
[Amit Varma]: the goods and services out there become more expensive.
[Amit Varma]: And if you just keep indiscriminately
[Amit Varma]: printing money,
[Amit Varma]: this just gets worse and worse
[Amit Varma]: till it spirals to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: unmanageable proportions till, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what you used to buy a house with.
[Amit Varma]: One year later you buy a loaf of bread with that
[Amit Varma]: and the poor are most
[Amit Varma]: hurt by it. But what kind of surprises me is that
[Amit Varma]: despite a lot of this happening for
[Amit Varma]: even the early, since the start of
[Amit Varma]: Chavez's regime in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: he had popular support for
[Amit Varma]: a much longer time than you would have.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, is that because people
[Amit Varma]: disconnect what is happening to them from
[Amit Varma]: the economic policies
[Amit Varma]: that a government carries out?
[Guest]: I think what Chavez did masterfully
[Guest]: was control the narrative.
[Guest]: That's what he was the most successful
[Guest]: politician to do. So he said
[Guest]: that all the economic woes were to do with
[Guest]: an economic war being waged
[Guest]: against him and Maduro's
[Guest]: government, right? So the evil
[Guest]: businessmen are stockpiling
[Guest]: goods, the evil businessmen
[Guest]: are upping prices in
[Guest]: a speculative manner to ruin your life,
[Guest]: etc. And, you know,
[Guest]: hyperinflation is an abstract
[Guest]: concept and it's not that easy to understand.
[Guest]: And if the government dominates the airwaves
[Guest]: and you don't have a background in economics,
[Guest]: or perhaps not a background
[Guest]: in anything because you weren't able to pursue your
[Guest]: education, it's actually much
[Guest]: easier to blame a speculator.
[Guest]: And once the situation became
[Guest]: really difficult in Venezuela and we had
[Guest]: those hundreds of people
[Guest]: banging on supermarket doors,
[Guest]: demanding food,
[Guest]: which happened all the time,
[Guest]: you had the creation of these
[Guest]: men called bachakeros,
[Guest]: which is actually a name that derives from
[Guest]: ants that can carry a lot on its back,
[Guest]: which is lovely poetry,
[Guest]: but in practice was terrible, right?
[Guest]: So these men who queue up,
[Guest]: buy up products that they then resell
[Guest]: at a heightened price, right? Because not everyone
[Guest]: can stand in line all day
[Guest]: waiting for food. They have to get
[Guest]: to work and some of them do have disposable
[Guest]: income to pay more. So
[Guest]: it's a lot easier if you're
[Guest]: poor, stuck in line for hours,
[Guest]: waiting to buy a pack of pasta,
[Guest]: and you see these
[Guest]: bachakeros slip in line in front of you,
[Guest]: threaten you, buy up the products,
[Guest]: and then you see those same products on your street corner
[Guest]: the next day for five times the price. Well, who's to blame?
[Guest]: The bachakeros, right?
[Guest]: Of course, bachakeros
[Guest]: don't exist in countries where you have
[Guest]: enough supply and you don't have controls,
[Guest]: but that's harder to remember when
[Guest]: you're in the thick of it and you want to survive.
[Guest]: I'm speaking more about
[Guest]: Maduro's time in this essence,
[Guest]: but I think in Chavez it was similar. He dominated
[Guest]: the narrative and there was an incredibly polarized country,
[Guest]: right? Where it was us against them.
[Amit Varma]: No, and also one thing all these guys fell
[Amit Varma]: prey to, not just Maduro and Chavez,
[Amit Varma]: but even before that, is the temptation
[Amit Varma]: of price controls. Like you referred to magical realism
[Amit Varma]: earlier, and price controls really are
[Amit Varma]: magical thinking. If you fix the price of something
[Amit Varma]: that's where it'll stay. But as we
[Amit Varma]: know, price controls lead to shortages.
[Amit Varma]: And then when you have shortages,
[Amit Varma]: obviously the black market
[Amit Varma]: gets involved, as
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned. And a lot of the problem in
[Amit Varma]: Venezuela was, the way
[Amit Varma]: I understood it, was driven not just by the rampant
[Amit Varma]: inflation, but also then because
[Amit Varma]: inflation put the prices of
[Amit Varma]: goods out of reach of many people.
[Amit Varma]: Chavez and then Maduro reacted
[Amit Varma]: by imposing price controls,
[Amit Varma]: which completely changed the incentives
[Amit Varma]: for manufacturers who wouldn't manufacture
[Amit Varma]: anymore, and the domestic manufacturing industry
[Amit Varma]: died anyway. And
[Amit Varma]: therefore goods became
[Guest]: extremely scarce. Exactly.
[Guest]: It created a negative food bag loop,
[Guest]: where inflation would be up, the government would
[Guest]: panic and decide to take
[Guest]: corrective measures. So Maduro would
[Guest]: come on TV, as he does almost every day,
[Guest]: because that's how he governs, through the television,
[Guest]: and announce a 35%
[Guest]: wage increase to
[Guest]: tackle hyperinflation, for instance, which
[Guest]: meant that in turn, everyone had to increase the
[Guest]: prices of the goods or services they were offering.
[Amit Varma]: Because the wage increase came from basically
[Guest]: printing money. Exactly. And then the
[Guest]: shop owners have to pay their employees more, right?
[Guest]: And so then, they even had
[Guest]: this, they still do, have a
[Guest]: superintendence of fair prices.
[Guest]: They have inspectors that are sent out,
[Guest]: often with a state TV camera trailing behind
[Guest]: them, and they inspect the evil
[Guest]: businessmen and, you know,
[Guest]: fine them, arrest them, or whatever, if
[Guest]: they feel like they're price gouging.
[Guest]: And so, of course, you know,
[Guest]: how does your business survive
[Amit Varma]: in those conditions? And you have
[Amit Varma]: to raise prices, and yet at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: and you know, another trend that I noticed, which again
[Amit Varma]: became much worse under Chavez,
[Amit Varma]: was expropriations, where the government would just
[Amit Varma]: say, okay, these private businesses
[Amit Varma]: are, you know, cannibals, and we're
[Amit Varma]: just going to take them over. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there's, one of this even happened live on television,
[Amit Varma]: where he went to the square in
[Amit Varma]: Caracas, and he asked the mayor
[Amit Varma]: of that area with him that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what is that shop? And he points
[Amit Varma]: to one building, and those are the jewellery stores,
[Amit Varma]: and he says, expropriate them.
[Amit Varma]: And before the show is over, the guy has
[Amit Varma]: bought the papers, and he signed them.
[Amit Varma]: And then in the middle of the night, the store owners come
[Amit Varma]: to take the jewellery in cardboard boxes.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, then
[Amit Varma]: the reporter who wrote about this says that a year
[Amit Varma]: later, there was absolutely, I think this was Rory
[Unknown]: Gallagher in his book, Comandante, that
[Amit Varma]: a year later, the building is just empty, and there's
[Amit Varma]: absolutely nothing there, and it's all gone to waste.
[Guest]: Right. So I think you're hitting on a
[Guest]: very important point there, because, yes,
[Guest]: there were flawed policies in the Maduro
[Guest]: government, in the Chavez government, and yes, there
[Guest]: was a lot of corruption. But one of the main
[Guest]: characteristics of their governance was just incompetence.
[Guest]: Right? Because there are ways
[Guest]: of nationalising, compensating
[Guest]: whoever was nationalised,
[Guest]: and putting together a structure to keep
[Guest]: that going. But
[Guest]: this was just Chavez on TV saying
[Guest]: expropriado. And there
[Guest]: was no follow-up, and there was no
[Guest]: attempt to really create a structure. So this happened
[Guest]: in factories, in
[Guest]: farms, jewellery stores, just
[Guest]: deserted, abandoned,
[Guest]: and it's just so wasteful
[Amit Varma]: and heartbreaking. So you're saying
[Amit Varma]: is it then the case, just thinking
[Amit Varma]: aloud, that it's not even happening for
[Amit Varma]: ideological reasons, which would be bad enough,
[Amit Varma]: but just out of Chavez's showmanship,
[Amit Varma]: you know, to create those kind of optics, and
[Amit Varma]: to feed into his narrative, that, you know, private guy
[Amit Varma]: bad, and I'm your saviour, and I'm going to save you all.
[Guest]: You know, I had the distinct
[Guest]: impression that everything at
[Guest]: a certain point in Venezuela was just
[Guest]: being governed, it was governance through
[Guest]: television. That's not only because I had the
[Guest]: unfortunate luck of being a journalist there, meaning I had to
[Guest]: watch state TV day in, day out, which
[Guest]: killed my neurons. But Maduro
[Guest]: comes on television every day to speak,
[Guest]: just like Chavez did, and that
[Guest]: becomes, you know, a proxy
[Guest]: for governance, you know, a flawed one, of
[Guest]: course, that becomes the be-all, end-all,
[Amit Varma]: controlling the narrative.
[Amit Varma]: And how did kind of, like Chavez
[Amit Varma]: seems to me, like you pointed out, he
[Amit Varma]: kind of died, treated by doctors
[Amit Varma]: in Cuba. He died before
[Amit Varma]: the oil prices fell, and
[Amit Varma]: you know, but Maduro effectively
[Amit Varma]: was following out exactly the same kind of
[Amit Varma]: policies, and what has happened to Maduro, I imagine
[Amit Varma]: would have happened to Chavez,
[Amit Varma]: but what was the kind of change that, I mean, and
[Amit Varma]: those are the years where you
[Amit Varma]: enter the story, and you know, 2014
[Amit Varma]: onwards you've been there, and
[Amit Varma]: so what really happened?
[Amit Varma]: Take me through these last five years.
[Guest]: Sure. So
[Guest]: Maduro is very narrowly elected
[Guest]: in a very controversial vote
[Guest]: where the opposition still maintains
[Guest]: it actually won.
[Guest]: We're talking about the actual numbers
[Amit Varma]: around the whole vote, of course.
[Guest]: As in they're talking about the elections were rigged, basically.
[Guest]: They were tweaked. That's what the opposition claims.
[Guest]: Undeniably,
[Guest]: the government used the state to its
[Guest]: advantage, so busing people in, changing voting
[Guest]: centers, all sorts of dirty tricks, but there's
[Guest]: still a question as to whether the actual numbers were tweaked.
[Guest]: So
[Guest]: he gets elected with, you know, very slim
[Guest]: majority and little
[Guest]: credibility. As you said,
[Guest]: he was a yes man to Chavez, a former
[Guest]: bus driver and union leader
[Guest]: who, you know, didn't have any
[Guest]: grand vision of his own, was at the time seen
[Guest]: as quite a conciliatory
[Guest]: figure, was able to negotiate
[Guest]: and had been a fairly decent
[Guest]: foreign minister in terms of his approach
[Guest]: to other heads of states.
[Guest]: But, you know, not cut out to be a president.
[Guest]: So he takes on the approach
[Guest]: of, Chavez was loved.
[Guest]: I was designated to be his successor.
[Guest]: Therefore, I shall not tweak any of
[Guest]: his policies.
[Guest]: And he stands firm,
[Guest]: you know, backing these increasingly
[Guest]: ludicrous and destructive
[Guest]: policies as Venezuela's economy
[Guest]: utterly unravels.
[Guest]: And there starts to be increasing pressure for, look,
[Guest]: you have to devalue, you have to let private
[Guest]: investment in, you have to start to lift the
[Guest]: currency controls, you have to
[Guest]: increase gasoline prices, and Venezuela
[Guest]: has the cheapest gasoline prices in the world.
[Guest]: It's essentially free. Another one of the
[Guest]: wild distortions of this magical
[Guest]: realist place. But Maduro does
[Guest]: not do any of that. So progressively
[Guest]: the situation just spirals entirely
[Guest]: out of control. When I arrived
[Guest]: in 2014,
[Guest]: there were odd shortages, right?
[Guest]: I'd go to the supermarket and I'd ask
[Guest]: for coffee and they'd say, oh no, we don't have any.
[Guest]: And I remember one security guard said, well, come back
[Guest]: tomorrow, I think we're going to get a shipment tomorrow, you know,
[Guest]: in kind of a conspiratorial whisper.
[Guest]: Okay, so I came back the next day and I got my coffee, right?
[Guest]: But over time, it became
[Guest]: far more critical.
[Guest]: And that's when you really started having people
[Guest]: getting malnourished, people dying
[Guest]: of preventable diseases,
[Guest]: you know, like diphtheria returned
[Guest]: because there was a shortage of vaccines
[Guest]: and the whole health system disintegrated.
[Guest]: Cancer patients
[Guest]: couldn't find their oncological medicine anymore.
[Guest]: Even people who
[Guest]: had successfully overcome things, like
[Guest]: gotten a transplant for a failed organ
[Guest]: and were living and happy
[Guest]: suddenly couldn't find the medicine
[Guest]: they needed to help stop their organ from being rejected.
[Guest]: So just the
[Guest]: humanitarian crisis balloons.
[Guest]: And Maduro and his acolytes
[Guest]: just dig in, essentially
[Guest]: ignore reality.
[Guest]: They both ignore it and blame it
[Guest]: on the opposition without ever
[Guest]: kind of acknowledging how dramatic
[Guest]: it's gotten.
[Guest]: They undeniably live in a bubble.
[Guest]: They limit their outside interaction
[Guest]: with the people. Everything is very choreographed
[Guest]: and stage managed.
[Guest]: And, you know, it's gotten to a point
[Guest]: of no return where it's so difficult
[Guest]: to reform the economy now unless you have a major bailout.
[Guest]: Because anything you would
[Guest]: touch could be dynamite, right?
[Guest]: If you lift currency controls
[Guest]: now or something, it could just completely destabilize
[Guest]: and wreck the country in the short term.
[Guest]: And they don't have the economic know-how
[Guest]: or the wherewithal to do that.
[Guest]: So he's just dug himself into a complete hole.
[Amit Varma]: And I believe
[Amit Varma]: there's a refugee crisis out of Venezuela
[Amit Varma]: which people have compared to Syria
[Amit Varma]: and said it's actually worse and anyone
[Amit Varma]: who can get out somehow, anyhow, is getting
[Amit Varma]: out because it's just not feasible anymore.
[Guest]: Oh yes. I mean, the initial
[Guest]: wave happened during the Chavez era
[Guest]: when wealthy people, especially businessmen
[Guest]: said, this is not smelling right,
[Guest]: I'm getting out. But they left, you know,
[Guest]: they took a plane, they had their money,
[Guest]: they settled in Miami and Madrid
[Guest]: and continued being doctors or engineers.
[Guest]: It was sad, of course, but their life went on
[Guest]: and they're doing well.
[Guest]: But what happened under the Maduro government
[Guest]: is the poor people suffered the worst.
[Guest]: The poor and the middle class that got
[Guest]: thrown into poverty because of hyperinflation
[Guest]: and the general economic situation.
[Guest]: And initially a lot of them left
[Guest]: by bus or short-haul flight
[Guest]: to the rest of Latin America.
[Guest]: But increasingly what we're seeing is dirt poor people
[Guest]: just walking across
[Guest]: Latin America to as far as they can,
[Amit Varma]: as far as their money will carry them.
[Amit Varma]: And how does the international community
[Amit Varma]: deal with this? Because
[Amit Varma]: there's also a wariness over time
[Amit Varma]: of interfering with other countries' private
[Amit Varma]: matters. And this is also
[Amit Varma]: a complicated area for someone
[Amit Varma]: like the US to sort of
[Amit Varma]: do something about because there is also
[Amit Varma]: this narrative about how
[Amit Varma]: Chavez and Maduro after him are these
[Amit Varma]: great saviors of communism
[Unknown]: and these neoliberals are
[Unknown]: constantly interfering and they
[Unknown]: are to blame. A narrative
[Amit Varma]: pushed to a large extent by Chavez himself and
[Amit Varma]: quite masterfully pushed but obviously
[Amit Varma]: utterly untrue. So how does
[Amit Varma]: the international community then deal
[Amit Varma]: with that? They have to be wary of responding
[Amit Varma]: but at the same time when there is such a massive
[Amit Varma]: humanitarian crisis going on
[Amit Varma]: it's hard to also say we'll
[Guest]: do nothing. Yes, I think that was a big
[Guest]: quandary especially for Latin America where sensitivities
[Guest]: to US involvement are so high.
[Guest]: And for most of Chavez's
[Guest]: governance, much of
[Guest]: the rest of South America was also
[Guest]: ruled by the left wing. It was very cozy with
[Guest]: Chavez and in some instances
[Guest]: possibly benefited from his oil largesse
[Guest]: or just private funds for campaigns.
[Guest]: So there's very muted criticism of him.
[Guest]: Over time that
[Guest]: pink tide, as it was called, has
[Guest]: ebbed over Latin America with the commodities price
[Guest]: crash. So now actually you have a
[Guest]: string of right wing governments.
[Guest]: Still there was wariness about confronting him
[Guest]: directly but the fact that
[Guest]: so many migrants and refugees were spilling into
[Guest]: Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Argentina, Chile
[Guest]: and because the situation
[Guest]: has deteriorated in terms of human rights
[Guest]: and democracy so much in Venezuela
[Guest]: those countries have spoken out.
[Guest]: But there is still this unease
[Guest]: with having the US lead
[Guest]: the charge. And for a long time
[Guest]: at least under Obama, the US
[Guest]: administration was pushing Mexico or Brazil
[Guest]: regional powerhouses
[Guest]: to lead, to avoid having the US
[Guest]: be at the forefront because the US
[Guest]: has had a track record of supporting
[Guest]: dictators or even coups in Latin America
[Guest]: during the Cold War and there's a huge
[Guest]: amount of resentment against the United States
[Guest]: for that and that helps explain
[Guest]: the rise of people like Chavez.
[Guest]: I think now
[Guest]: because Latin America is dominated
[Guest]: by the right and because
[Guest]: there's so much sense of such urgency
[Amit Varma]: they're all behind Trump.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of the resentment
[Amit Varma]: of course is justified and it takes me back to
[Amit Varma]: the old story about when
[Amit Varma]: Chavez comes to power, shortly after he comes to power
[Amit Varma]: there's a massive earthquake
[Amit Varma]: where millions get affected
[Amit Varma]: and the US
[Amit Varma]: offers to send aid
[Amit Varma]: Venezuela agrees the aid
[Amit Varma]: is on its way and then in the middle of the night
[Amit Varma]: Chavez calls the minister concerned and he says tell them to go back
[Amit Varma]: and the minister says no, no
[Amit Varma]: but they're already on their way and we need the help
[Amit Varma]: we can't do anything about it and he says no, no
[Amit Varma]: I don't want the Americans here because
[Amit Varma]: and he gets paranoid about, you know, they'll snoop on us
[Amit Varma]: and blah, blah, blah and he gets them to go back
[Amit Varma]: and there is speculation that maybe he spoke to Castro
[Amit Varma]: overnight and Castro told him to do that
[Amit Varma]: but whatever the case may be
[Amit Varma]: but the interesting thing through the Chavez years was
[Amit Varma]: that although he kept ranting about
[Amit Varma]: George W. Bush in very funny
[Amit Varma]: and amusing ways, I'm not going to quote
[Amit Varma]: any of that but some great quotes
[Amit Varma]: Google it, although he kept
[Amit Varma]: ranting about the imperialists
[Amit Varma]: and the neoliberals and the Americans and so on
[Amit Varma]: when it came to oil, it was business
[Amit Varma]: as usual. Venezuela was super
[Amit Varma]: efficient in supplying oil
[Amit Varma]: to the US which was the biggest buyer
[Amit Varma]: and everything there went smoothly
[Guest]: Yes
[Guest]: and bilateral relationship had ebbs
[Guest]: and flows and
[Guest]: Chavez would kick out the US
[Guest]: ambassador and vice versa
[Guest]: and Maduro likewise but the oil kept
[Guest]: flowing and the US was
[Guest]: depending on what metric he used
[Guest]: as the biggest cash paying consumer
[Guest]: because over time
[Guest]: Venezuela ended up mortgaging its oil to
[Guest]: Russia and China to pay back
[Guest]: loans that they were receiving
[Guest]: so the US was of crucial importance
[Guest]: those flows are not changing
[Guest]: because of sanctions and India
[Guest]: actually is I think
[Guest]: becoming or has become the number one
[Guest]: cash buyer of Venezuelan oil
[Amit Varma]: Ouch, is this something we should
[Guest]: feel bad about?
[Guest]: India's private companies
[Unknown]: are reporting, right?
[Guest]: It's a different calculation and
[Guest]: everything leads to believe that Venezuela
[Amit Varma]: is offering nice discounts
[Amit Varma]: Money is fungible
[Amit Varma]: What's the politics in Venezuela like
[Amit Varma]: right now?
[Amit Varma]: One interesting sort of
[Amit Varma]: turning point in Venezuelan politics
[Amit Varma]: which is easy to identify and you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: it in our conversation before the podcast
[Amit Varma]: was obviously the 2005 elections
[Amit Varma]: when there was
[Amit Varma]: this where somebody reported
[Amit Varma]: that voting is no longer anonymous
[Amit Varma]: you can find out who's kind of
[Amit Varma]: voted and because of this
[Amit Varma]: the entire opposition decided to
[Amit Varma]: boycott the elections
[Amit Varma]: and Chavez basically
[Amit Varma]: swept the assembly seats obviously because
[Amit Varma]: his party was the only
[Amit Varma]: contender there. Did that
[Amit Varma]: have a long term impact? Did the
[Amit Varma]: opposition recover from that
[Guest]: and come back strongly and what's the situation
[Guest]: today?
[Guest]: The Venezuelan opposition
[Guest]: has long been elitist, very
[Guest]: quarrelsome, dominated by a smattering
[Guest]: of parties that no one's ever heard of abroad but
[Guest]: who love to fight amongst themselves
[Guest]: and their boycott of the 2005
[Guest]: vote essentially annulled
[Guest]: them from the political scene and gave
[Guest]: Chavez a complete
[Guest]: blank check to do whatever he wanted because his
[Guest]: party controlled the National Assembly
[Guest]: It also fit into this
[Guest]: the opposition would repeatedly
[Guest]: cry wolf before
[Guest]: when it wasn't necessary, right?
[Guest]: Chavez was clearly
[Guest]: problematic for institutions from the start but the
[Guest]: opposition would be wildly
[Guest]: exaggerating what was happening and lose credibility
[Guest]: in the process so by boycotting the elections
[Guest]: and saying this wasn't a
[Guest]: democracy and Chavez is the dictator
[Guest]: when I think a lot of political scientists would say
[Guest]: he wasn't, he had autocratic tendency but it wasn't
[Guest]: a dictatorship. They actually facilitated
[Guest]: his road to creating a
[Guest]: much more authoritarian government
[Guest]: Over time the opposition
[Guest]: has done some soul searching
[Guest]: and Enrique Capriles who was a
[Guest]: two time presidential candidate for the opposition
[Guest]: actually said no
[Guest]: we cannot demonize Chavistas
[Guest]: Chavez supporters
[Guest]: we must talk to them, understand
[Guest]: why they voted Chavez and show them
[Guest]: why we're the path forward
[Guest]: so he actually did crisscross the country
[Guest]: go into the slums and the poor villages
[Guest]: and talk to people and won over a lot of them
[Guest]: not enough to win the election
[Amit Varma]: again we don't know exactly what happened
[Guest]: Maybe he won it
[Guest]: but he changed the narrative
[Guest]: and kind of shook up what used to be
[Guest]: kind of a bastion of the
[Guest]: wealthy Caracas old families
[Guest]: but in the last few
[Guest]: years the government crackdown on the opposition
[Guest]: has been much more ferocious
[Guest]: so you know you have
[Guest]: exiled politicians in Washington and Colombia
[Guest]: in Europe, others who are
[Guest]: in jail or under house arrest
[Guest]: or even one who's
[Guest]: holed up in the Chilean embassy and has been holed up there
[Guest]: for months if not a year by now
[Guest]: so they've completely
[Guest]: chopped up the opposition
[Guest]: annulled political parties, annulled any
[Guest]: kind of political movement they tried to create
[Guest]: to unseat Maduro
[Guest]: and so it's very hard for them to articulate themselves now
[Amit Varma]: So where do things stand now
[Guest]: as of today?
[Guest]: It's been a whirlwind since January
[Guest]: so Maduro was sworn in for his second term
[Guest]: in January after a very
[Guest]: again a decried election where all the
[Guest]: Western powers said this was a fraudulent
[Guest]: vote and everyone kind of
[Guest]: expected it to be game over
[Guest]: after that but then
[Guest]: this new kind of fresh-faced
[Guest]: opposition leader, Juan Guaido
[Guest]: who had just become the
[Guest]: head of the Venezuelan congress
[Guest]: which is still led by the opposition
[Guest]: and incidentally he became head of
[Guest]: the congress because most of the people
[Guest]: or many of the leaders in his party are either in exile
[Guest]: in prison or holed up in the
[Guest]: embassy so he was kind of the last person
[Guest]: standing and no one expected him
[Guest]: to become the face of
[Guest]: the rejuvenated opposition
[Guest]: so Juan Guaido was 35
[Guest]: swore himself in
[Guest]: citing the constitution, his constitutional right
[Guest]: to do that and declared himself president
[Guest]: and that just set
[Guest]: in motion a whole chain of events
[Guest]: the US supported him, other European
[Guest]: countries and Latin American countries also recognized
[Guest]: him, it sparked
[Guest]: a huge wave of protests
[Guest]: and we thought the Venezuelan
[Guest]: people were kind of broken, right? Immigration
[Guest]: was the way out, everyone has just
[Guest]: lost hope that anything could ever change and
[Guest]: almost overnight it seems that people took to the street
[Guest]: with renewed hope
[Guest]: there was hope
[Guest]: in the US and amongst the
[Guest]: opposition that the military would
[Guest]: immediately defect and support Guaido
[Guest]: that did not happen
[Guest]: the military in Venezuela is essentially an
[Guest]: extension of the government, it has control
[Guest]: over whatever lucrative business is left
[Guest]: in the country. Plan B was
[Guest]: to try to force in humanitarian aid
[Guest]: so we had a standoff at the
[Guest]: Venezuelan border
[Guest]: a few days ago
[Guest]: where the
[Guest]: opposition tried to drive in these trucks
[Guest]: full with food and
[Guest]: the Venezuelan soldiers blocked them and there were
[Guest]: confrontations, tear gas and Molotov cocktails
[Guest]: etc, but it failed
[Guest]: there was a number of defections, an
[Guest]: increasing number of defections from rank
[Guest]: and file soldiers, I think we're at about over 500
[Guest]: now, which is interesting and it's increasing
[Guest]: every day, it's not a groundswell
[Guest]: and we're not talking about the big fish, but it's
[Guest]: something to monitor.
[Guest]: Guaido left Venezuela
[Guest]: to see the aid through from Colombia
[Guest]: and is now in Brazil, meeting
[Guest]: the president there. He's vowed
[Guest]: to come back to Venezuela
[Guest]: but Maduro has said
[Guest]: there was a travel ban on you, if you return
[Guest]: you shall be detained. So
[Guest]: there's a big question there and possibly
[Amit Varma]: a looming confrontation.
[Amit Varma]: It seems like the political scientist
[Amit Varma]: A.O. Hirschman once said that if you're
[Amit Varma]: dissatisfied with the government you have three options
[Amit Varma]: which are you comply, you complain
[Amit Varma]: or you leave. And when I first
[Amit Varma]: heard that quote, I thought okay, no one's going to leave, who can
[Amit Varma]: leave, you know, but now what's happening is that
[Amit Varma]: there are people who have simply no option
[Amit Varma]: they cannot comply because they do not
[Amit Varma]: have food and there's no point complaining
[Amit Varma]: so they're leaving and
[Amit Varma]: it's just, and this is again like you
[Amit Varma]: said, it's the poorest of the poor, so it's
[Amit Varma]: a kind of a
[Amit Varma]: ludicrous situation
[Amit Varma]: going forward for Venezuela
[Amit Varma]: then, given the state of the politics
[Amit Varma]: and the state of the economy, what's a
[Amit Varma]: best case scenario and what's a worst case
[Guest]: scenario in your view?
[Guest]: It's
[Guest]: kind of difficult for me to pine as a journalist
[Guest]: but I would say that
[Guest]: because a majority of people
[Guest]: seem to want elections and there are
[Guest]: significant doubts about the previous election
[Guest]: the ideal scenario
[Guest]: for many people would probably
[Guest]: be to hold fair
[Guest]: and just elections where the people can actually
[Guest]: express their desire
[Guest]: and that is highly
[Guest]: unlikely to happen
[Guest]: there are many worst case scenarios
[Guest]: it's hard to say which is worst
[Guest]: Venezuela is constantly defied to expectations
[Guest]: of how bad it can get and
[Guest]: unfortunately I have no
[Guest]: I know
[Guest]: it can get worse, I think what's most
[Guest]: worried me is how lawless it can become
[Guest]: in many ways of course the government
[Guest]: is autocratic but it also doesn't
[Guest]: have control over many of the factions
[Guest]: that rule the country, the gangs
[Guest]: the crime rings
[Guest]: and then just the kind of isolated
[Guest]: rural areas where there's no state
[Guest]: there's no infrastructure
[Guest]: there are no services and
[Guest]: nothing works, nothing works
[Guest]: you can't make a phone call, you can't buy food
[Guest]: you can't transfer money, you can't get on the internet
[Guest]: you can't wash your clothes
[Guest]: there's no water, you can't turn on the light switch
[Guest]: I mean we're just talking about a complete
[Guest]: collapse in every single way
[Amit Varma]: Sounds like Afghanistan
[Amit Varma]: at its worst with the exception that this is
[Amit Varma]: a country that has enough oil to
[Amit Varma]: last it for more than 300 years
[Amit Varma]: this country should be insanely rich
[Guest]: Absolutely
[Guest]: and it's also a tropical country
[Guest]: the vegetation is somewhat similar to
[Guest]: to Mumbai actually
[Guest]: so it's so incongruent to see
[Guest]: people who are famished who show you their
[Guest]: ID cards and you can't recognize them because they were
[Guest]: so plump four years ago and now
[Guest]: are just a shadow of themselves
[Guest]: and they're climbing up trees trying to get mangoes
[Guest]: because this is a bountiful country
[Guest]: and thank God because otherwise people would have
[Guest]: been in even more dire
[Guest]: straits and I'm not excusing
[Guest]: hunger in deserts
[Guest]: or in Siberia or what have you but it's
[Guest]: just so shocking to see that in a
[Guest]: country that is actually very fertile
[Guest]: and where bananas and mangoes and coconuts
[Guest]: are growing wildly on every corner
[Amit Varma]: Blessed by nature and cursed by humans
[Amit Varma]: Yes
[Amit Varma]: So this has been a very illuminating episode
[Amit Varma]: but I'm going to end it by asking
[Amit Varma]: a question that kind of takes a step back
[Amit Varma]: I mean
[Amit Varma]: in the current times that we live in there
[Amit Varma]: obviously is an upsurge of
[Amit Varma]: populism all across the world in fact
[Amit Varma]: you know just reading the biographies
[Amit Varma]: of Chavez it struck me
[Amit Varma]: in how many ways he's common
[Amit Varma]: to the likes of Modi, Erdogan, Orban
[Amit Varma]: I mean there are so many commonalities
[Amit Varma]: and one phrase I came across again and again
[Unknown]: which I thought was a lovely phrase was Chavismo
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: Chavismo and tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: Chavismo not just in a Venezuelan
[Amit Varma]: context but Chavismo
[Amit Varma]: in a global context and do you think
[Amit Varma]: you know why do you think it's
[Amit Varma]: there and what can be
[Amit Varma]: done about it by people who are concerned
[Guest]: about it?
[Guest]: To be fair I think Chavismo at its
[Guest]: best and in its heart was
[Guest]: a dream of a people
[Guest]: to have justice, to reap
[Guest]: the rewards of this
[Guest]: bountiful country and to
[Amit Varma]: right past wrongs
[Guest]: But that's a rhetorical thing
[Guest]: Yes but people really
[Guest]: fervently believe that and as
[Guest]: I mentioned they kind of believe it
[Guest]: as a religion. So I remember speaking to a
[Guest]: social worker who says how can I
[Guest]: un-teach my children this is what I believe
[Guest]: it's like a religion for me
[Guest]: it's so deeply ingrained
[Guest]: that it's almost like severing part of
[Guest]: yourself to stop believing or to
[Guest]: finally face the writing on the wall
[Guest]: What it turned out to be
[Guest]: is an obscene
[Guest]: level of patronage, cronyism
[Guest]: and perhaps
[Guest]: a massive money laundering
[Amit Varma]: and drug trading operation
[Amit Varma]: Like all religions are false religions
[Amit Varma]: I think yes
[Amit Varma]: Sorry that's my view
[Guest]: I mean it strayed so dramatically
[Guest]: from the rhetoric of Chavez in the
[Guest]: early days that it's
[Guest]: absolutely shocking
[Guest]: I've wrestled for a long time with what the global
[Guest]: implications are for this because
[Guest]: Venezuela is such a one-off it seems
[Guest]: in many ways of course it's a cautionary tale
[Guest]: in terms of squandering
[Guest]: oil wealth or following
[Guest]: for populist sellers
[Guest]: of dreams but it's also
[Guest]: pushed things to such an
[Guest]: extreme that it's sometimes
[Guest]: hard to extrapolate
[Guest]: but yes I think certain
[Guest]: certain themes
[Guest]: certain boring but fundamental themes
[Guest]: like fiscal responsibility and
[Guest]: the importance of institutions come to mind
[Guest]: as trite as that
[Guest]: is you never realize their
[Guest]: value more than when all of that is crumbling
[Amit Varma]: Alexander thank you so much for coming on the show
[Guest]: I really enjoyed talking to you
[Guest]: Thank you so much
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show
[Amit Varma]: do follow Alexander on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: at Alexander Ulmer
[Amit Varma]: That's A-L-E-X-A-N-D-R-A-U-L-M-E-R
[Amit Varma]: You should also follow
[Amit Varma]: Reuters Venezuela at Reuters
[Amit Varma]: V-Z-L-A
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: at Amit Verma
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes at
[Amit Varma]: TheSeenAndTheUnseen and SeenUnseen.in
[Amit Varma]: and ThinkPragati.com
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening
[Unknown]: We could talk about how there's no such thing as love
[Unknown]: and it's all a load of crap
[Unknown]: and nothing can ever truly bring meaning
[Unknown]: to our lives
[Unknown]: You might need some help there
[Unknown]: Alright it's a yes then
[Unknown]: Dating is garbage
[Unknown]: Every week we break down all things from dating apps
[Unknown]: social media, texting, calling, dating rules
[Unknown]: and more with some really cool people
[Unknown]: Episodes out every Thursday
[Unknown]: on the IBM Podcasts app
[Unknown]: wherever you get your podcasts
[Unknown]: Don't forget to tune in to the Sponge Podcast
[Unknown]: Keep Sponging to Keep Learning